---
layout: content
title: Invited Speakers - Mara Abel
---

**Modelling geological knowledge for petroleum exploration: Why should
we bother about good models?**

## Abstract

Before designing a software application, a conceptual model is defined
in order to simplify the geological reality and to help to understand
it. This model preserves the intention of the geologist in designing
the application. However, such models do not represent the reality
itself, but the conceptualization of the geologist about reality when
building the application. In order to guarantee that software can be
further integrated, this conceptualization needs to be shared by the
community of earth scientists. This will assure that the geological
concepts embedded in the software correspond to the same view of
geological reality. Ontologies are being developed and used for
explicating the semantics of the reservoir models and for integrating
the data generated in the various stages of the exploration chain. We
demonstrate how methodologies based on foundational ontologies can
help in taking ontological decisions for modeling and application
integration in petroleum exploration.  These methodologies help in
validating taxonomies by exposing inappropriate and inconsistent
modeling choices and lead the modeler to define more precisely the
geological objects in the model. We also present some knowledge-based
applications developed according through these notions.

## Short bio

Mara Abel has graduated in Geology and received a Masters and a
Doctorate degree in Computer Science at the Federal University of Rio
Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil.  She is an Associate Professor at
Informatics Institute of UFRGS, innovation researcher of CNPq (Level
1) and the leader of the branch “Intelligent Database” in the group
that applies Knowledge Engineering and ontologies to improve the
semantic of database models, especially those applied to petroleum
exploration data. She has produced remarkable petroleum industrial
research, such as the Petroledge® system, an intelligent database for
petroleum reservoir description and interpretation, and Strataledge® ,
an ontology-based system for rock core description, commercialized by
the ENDEEPER Company, a spin-off of her research group. She has
managed 10 research or technology innovation projects with public or
private funding from national and international institutions and she
has published more than 50 conference papers, journals and book
chapters in knowledge engineering.
